Well, the Joe Rogan experience. Yeah.
There's a stigma. There's a, do I really need this?
It just is hard to pick up and.
You don't want to, the person that wants help all the time, like, Hey, figure.
It out yourself. And can this person really helped me. Who's this going to be?
How do I find that therapist?
That's the most frequent question I get from my friends and family and people
I'm thinking I might need to see someone like, how do I go about doing that?
Get the question all the time. So yeah,
for cops it's even bigger because that whole control thing. And also,
like I said before, if their job is on the line.
So for these cops that are in that situation. So when they say, look,
I need to take some time off you, you basically just leave Malone and say,
if you want these resources here they are. Or did they, I mean is,
well.
Again, it's going to vary by department.
That's kind of crazy that it does vary by department. Yeah. Drives me nuts.
And is, has this discussion been, had like nationwide, oh.
There's,
there's so many good things and pieces of advice and recommendation out there.
One of the things that's kind of painful right now is, you know,
every morning I get a news recap from the international association of chiefs of
police. They send this email out to all the,
all the members of there and they have,
you have the psychological services group. And so you get these updates and I,
I usually just kind of pass them over, but lately with all the police reform.
So it just headlines from around the country.
And the piecemeal randomness of,
of this city is doing this and this city's doing this and this city is doing
this and this, and it's all over the place. You know, same,
that's driving me nuts because I'm like,
there's already been groups that have studied and reported and told us what we
need to do to help the, the,
the world of policing rise up and do better.
We've done information's out there from, from wonderful, brilliant people.
Who've come together and have laid it out for us. It's there,
but yet we don't have that national standard.
Each state has certain, you know, uh,
most states have a group like in California, it's a California post. Um,
you know, it's the police officer standards and training.
So they set all the rules for, um,
draining require minimal training requirements for all the departments in
California. So all the agencies,
police agencies here in this state are, you know,
need to comply with all of the post recommendations, but they're all, you know,
it's a minimum standard.
And our post California post is kind of heads and tails ahead of most of the
country. Some,
some states don't actually have that organization most do have something similar
to like what we have. So they do set some standards,
but there are so many things that are not included in that. Um,
and so it is a bit random. It's hard,
I think to make a one size fits all.
Everybody must do this because if you think about it,
I think there's about 18,000 different police agencies in the U S
and I, I read about 50% of those have 10 or fewer full-time officers.
So, you know, when you've got pulled out tiny little town in the middle of,
you know, the Midwest in a very rural county that that's, you know,
that's a whole lot different than LAPD, right? So it's,
it's hard to have everybody on the same standard and the same expectations when
we've got a lot of different makeups for a lot of different departments that
said there are some fundamentals that I think every department should be
held to. Um, and, and one of those is the debriefings after an incident.
And the one that, that almost no one is doing,
that's been talked about for awhile is regular mental wellness checks. You know,
at this point you get a psyche Val when you're hired or before you're hired.
And if you're in a critical incident, you may or may not get one more,
more are starting to do that.
And then the only other time you're going to be required to see the psychologist
is if you have messed up and you're in trouble and you're referred for a fitness
for duty evaluation. And at that point, your job is on the line.
Someone is saying that they think you're not fit for duty.
And that is a scary evaluation to have to be a part of because then you're going
in. And, and yeah, if the psychologist,
judges and decides that you are not able to go back out well, then you're,
then you're off duty until you can fix whatever that problem may be. Right.
Well also just for the public's health and welfare, it's important to do that.
I mean, there clearly are a lot of police officers that are unfit for duty.
How, how do we stop?
What happened in Minneapolis? How do we stop that from,
from happening or at least mitigate it?
So, I mean, again, I, I see everything through my lens as a psychologist,
as a police psychologist. So I'm sure there are things beyond my realm that,
that also answer this question. But for me,
the things that I think we could be doing different that would really make a
difference are the regular annual
mental wellness checks. If, from my perspective,
when I look at people like, you know, Derek, Shovan the, the officer that,
that murdered George Floyd, and we see what happened there. He,
I would say I would be willing to guess, and I don't know him.
I've never met him.
I don't know much about his career other than what I've read in the news and
whatnot police officers that get to that place become
that. They're not that when they're hired to get hired as a cop,
you have to go through what often takes a year long application process,
where they are digging and poking into every aspect of your background.
Your life.
Be clear though, that's in some places and other places it's pretty easy.
Again, smaller departments that don't have the resources. Probably, probably.
So, yeah.
I wouldn't, I shouldn't say pretty easy in comparison.
In comparison. Yeah. But the vast majority of departments have a pretty,
you know, have a similar process in that.
You're going to go through the application, have to pass a written test.
There's going to be a background investigation, which really,
I think is a hugely powerful key part. It,
that it should be a well done background investigation. Um, you know,
they're talking to people who, you know, people from your past, your landlord,
your ex wife, your girlfriend, your boyfriend, your.
Do that for every single candidate they do. Now.
Some agencies take far more care than others. Um, the,
the wide variety of people that I see that have passed their backgrounds,
some agencies I work for send me the most amazingly clean candidates and others
that are trying to hire a lot less squeaky clean, but they've,
they've all gone through. And it is, you know, gone through this background.
They also do a polygraph. They do social media checks. They, you know,
they make you list all your tattoos and, you know, so they're,
they're looking for, and if there is somebody who is just flagrantly,
racist has, you know, been out there, toting white supremacy,
like they're gonna, they're gonna see that somewhere in that digging around.
So th the blatant racist folks are likely weeded
out during a good background process.
Let's say maybe they're not as openly because, you know,
we all know that people know better than to admit to such things most of the
time, these days, and it could be more subtle. So at that point,
what comes next? You've got oral interviews with, you know, police,
administrators, um, uh, polygraph, you know, coming along in there.
And once they pass all of that, that's when they come to the last,
they get their conditional offer of employment.
So they're basically like as long as you get through these last two steps,
you're, you're good to go for the academy.
And the last two steps are the medical evaluation and the psych eval.
So by the time we get them, they have been heavily vetted,
poked around, you know, and, and, and, and looked through in their past.
And we get a, we get a pretty clean group of people,
but then we get to do more digging.
And we get to ask questions at this point that they're not able to ask before.
So about mental health and background and psychological treatment and history.
And so, you know, by that, and then if they get through these evaluations,
then they go on to the academy. So for us, that vetting process,
that psyche Val is a really important place.
And I've had a lot of conversations with other psychologists, you know,
in the past few months, like, what are we missing? I've had,
I taught a workshop a couple months ago for other police psychologists on,
you know, some of the things we do in these preemployment and had someone say,
how do we screen out the cops who kill? And I said, we can't.
And that was not a good answer that we can't, we, we can't, because we have to,
what we're doing here is predicting the future, right, where we're saying,
how do we know who is going to be that person who does that later
predicting the future's incredibly hard,
figuring out who maybe
subtly racist or bias is also incredibly hard.
So that said, we do a whole lot of things.
We've got our psychological tests that we give.
We ask a lot of crafty questions and we dig as deep as we can to try to, again,
weed out anyone who we think could potentially become that person down the
road, who could be a cop who kills, or who, you know,
is racist and bias and is treating people in properly. So, you know,
that's one big thing that we want to be very cautious and make sure we're doing
a good job of screening upfront, but I would say, um,
and so much more to say about the tests and the screening,
but gets really nerdy and detailed.
I would say that the officers who end up having the most problems are the ones
who once they get on are in a department where that is the culture,
that is that, that, that those types of behaviors are acceptable.
So as a young officer.
They learned at that, have you ever seen the documentary of the 75? I have not.
It's a great documentary about Michael Dowd,
who has been a guest on the podcast, who is a,
he was a terrible cop and talks openly about how he was corrupted and
how his first day on the forest. He,
he witnessed corruption and was told to shut his mouth and further,
went on to become a drug dealer and robbing drug dealers. And just,
it's a crazy documentary. You would enjoy it,
particularly from a psychological perspective,
because he's talking about it after having served time. Right. Um,
just showing the, the images from the time and telling the stories,
it's the culture of each individual department is
different and some are great. There's a great video of, uh, Floyd, uh, Flint,
Michigan, where, um, these police officers,
after the George Floyd death,
they show up for these protests and tell these people,
the protesting we're going to March with you. Like,
we're a part of this community too. Like we are, we're your friends.
Like we are police officers, but we are not the person who did that thing.
And we wouldn't do that thing.
And we want to show you that we support you and that we're here to help.
That's what, that's what really we want. It's beautiful.
It's so cool to see them all marched together and they're hugging. Um,
that's what we want that is.
And, and I think that one of the biggest things, when we, you know,
how do we prevent these,
these issues is we need to look at the individual officer level.
But I think,
I think that is very limited because I think the racist,
angry cop who kills has developed that way over time.
And I think one of the pieces is the culture in the department.
Is this something that's acceptable? Is there corruption in that department?
And so certainly better oversight and tracking is a really important thing. Um,
you know, that that should happen. But the other piece,
and the one that th that I focus more on from my end is the wellness, you know,
is this somebody who is burning out?
Is this somebody who has gone into a dangerous place, you know,
psychologically that they started out and they were fine when we screen them
upfront, but you know, over five or 10 or 15 years, they've seen so much.
And, you know,
there's some one there things happen in your brain that changed the way you
think and see, and perceive the world when you do this type of work. Right?
And when you get to a place where those, where that those processes have,
have really taken their toll, and somebody has gone down this kind of dark path,
it's hard to come out of that. And the,
and the way they react to the world and the individuals that they see on a daily
basis is going to be very different than what they look like when they were
hired.
So for not regularly checking in and seeing who might be at risk
for going to that dark place, that bitter and angry place,
you know, we're not able to catch them before something happens.
And that's where, you know, for me, my,
my big platform is regular wellness jacks.
I'm not the first one to come up with this idea.
It's been suggested by task forces and study groups and people who know a whole
lot more than I do for, for a while now. But in reading,
there was a wonderful, um, uh, uh,
report to Congress that was put out, um, by the cops,
which is community oriented policing services.
So they sent this like 60 page report to Congress, March of 2019,
and described in detail, you know,
all the things that we should be doing to pay attention to officer wellness.
One of which was,
we seem to think that some regular checkups would probably help,
but the problem is no one's doing them. And we have literally zero research on,
you know, what, what are they helpful? Can they prevent this?
And I believe they are. So my, you know,
my next big thing is to go and explore and,
and do that research so that we can show, Hey, this does help. We can, we can,
if we're touching base and we're getting people in,
then we can catch the problems as they develop.
And before they become a major problem where someone's interacting with the
community and they go awry and do something awful,
let's take care of them along the way and catch the problems before they,
um, you know, before they become behaviors that are problematic. Okay.